---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/almraje-fleeting-notes/jordan-peterson-s-guide-to-speaking/"}
---

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/e-I5u5hyoxY" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

#speaking 

Question: you have written an article on how to
write can you do the same on how to
speak 

Jordan: I suppose I could I could tell you
a little bit about it if you're gonna
speak about something you need to know a
lot about it you need to know three or
four times as much as you're gonna speak
about at minimum so first of all you
have to do your background research you
have to have multiple stories at hand
that you can use to illustrate your
point and you have to have a point you
have to organize what you're talking
about around a problem so before I go on
stage to speak on my tour I always sit
for half an hour some of which involves
usually about five minutes of anxiety
and I think okay there's a problem I'm
trying to address tonight a central
problem or a theme what is it might be
courage it might be responsibility it
might be meaning I think and that serves
as an organizing principle so that would
be the point and then basically I
organize say a dozen stories around that
and I can kind of arrange them in it as
a journey and it's a journey that
circles the main point and so I'm trying
to explore it to say what I think about
courage let's say but to take what I'm
thinking farther than I've taken it
already and so that I can plot out you
know little five-minute stories that I
have that are associated with courage
and then I can talk to the audience and
I would say talk about what you know use
your personal experience because that's
that's something that you're actually a
master of you can bring in other
material but it has to be tied to the
real world through your own experience
otherwise it's not real it's also very
good to speak directly to the audience
to the individuals in the audience
because I'm always looking at a single
person one after another and focusing on
them and talking to them just like you'd
have a conversation with someone and
that way I can see if they're following
along and
I'm always listening to the audience
what I really like to hear from the
audience is no noise at all silence
because if the audience especially you
know if it's a couple hundred or a
couple of thousand people if the
audience is dead silent then I know that
I'm on the right track and so the other
thing I would say is you're telling
stories so every fact that you relate or
every set of facts has to be tied to a
story there has to be a meaningful
output which is something like why is it
important to your life that you know
this fact how is it related to how
you're going to conduct yourself moving
forward or how are you going to see the
world so because that's kind of the
essence of meaning how does this fact
change the way you perceive the world or
act in the world that's the meaning of
the fact and facts without meaning are
dull so you need to know that you need
to tell the truth that's for sure and
and and I mean for me my talks are
really they're an attempt to explore a
set of ideas in the most truthful way
that I can manage and that's also an
adventure because letting yourself speak
freely about a topic you don't always
know where it's gonna go and so but that
also hooks in the audience because
they're not there along for the ride
right and there's a risk the risk is you
might forget where you are you might
lose the thread you might say something
you regret you might get confused and
it's this the talk should be a process
of exploration like a journey that
you're taking the audience along on it's
the same when you're reading a novel
like a great novel isn't exactly plotted
out from beginning to end to begin with
the author is taking himself or herself
and you on an intellectual adventure
through the through the character
development and the characters have to
be allowed to live and to express
themselves and the novel needs to unfold
it's like a colloquy between the
conscious mind and the unconscious
source of inspiration and the novel is
actually a journey through a
characterological landscape and the
author shouldn't know where he or she is
going to end up
at the beginning same with an artist and
who's writing a song or a piece of music
or a piece of visual art there has to be
play and exploration along the way and
so you also don't want to deliver an
over prepared talk in my estimation or
at least that's not how I do it you want
to have a theme you want to have a body
of knowledge from which you can draw on
and then you want to be actively
exploring the idea in front of the
audience and that's very gripping for
everyone including you and so and you
should learn something from the talk
it's an opportunity to think on your
feet and anyways that's my style of
lecturing it's it's a trapeze act
without a safety net I would say and
that's part of what makes it gripping is
that there's a high probability of
failure and I would say with any
performance that's going to be gripping
that on the edge of the seat gripping
there has to be a high probability of
failure and that's why I don't speak
with notes if you speak with notes which
you might have to if you're a beginning
speaker then you cannot fail because you
can always read the notes and so there's
a there's a net you'll fall in the net
but you won't die but you'll never do
anything spectacular so that's the thing
is if you're gonna do something
spectacular you have to take the risk
and if you're gonna take the risk you
have to think on your feet and then you
also have to have something to think
about you have to be been working on
this material you know I've been working
on this stuff I talked about for 30
years for tens of thousands of hours and
so I have that reservoir of knowledge I
suppose and you know whenever I read
something new I'm slotting it into the
knowledge structure that I used to
generate my talks and I'm reading all
the time and lots of the things I read I
forget they're not relevant to my
central mission whatever that happens to
be looks like some it looks something
like the delineation of the relationship
between responsibilities and meaning and
and maybe responsibilities meaning and
perception it's something like that and
so I have a central concern or deeper
than that in some sense my central
concern was how to ensure
personally that if I was tempted in a
situation like the situations that arose
in the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany
that I wouldn't fall prey to those
totalitarian systems and act in the
reprehensible manner that so many people
acted in that's really been a driving
concern of mine and and that's bleeds
over into the relationship between
meaning and responsibility and
perception so there's a core set of
problems that I'm working on and every
talk is an attempt to further develop
those so you also have to have a problem
you know you think well you don't want
to have a problem it's like yeah you do
you want to you want to you've got
problems anyways if you're alive you've
got problems pick one of them it can be
your problem and that can be the problem
you try to address whatever that happens
to be and then you have something to
talk about how am I going to address
this problem how can this problem be
addressed so you need to have a problem
too if you're gonna talk just like you
need to have a problem if you're gonna
write because the writing is an attempt
to solve the problem and so is there
talking if you're not trying to solve a
problem what the hell are you doing
talking why should anyone care it's got
to be a real problem to like a you know
a nail-biter of a problem a dragon of a
problem and if it's a problem that
everyone else shares so much the better
so and then you grapple with it so
