---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/almraje-fleeting-notes/mwtmr-gmis/0-forecasting-the-future-of-4-ir-creating-value-from-decentralisation/"}
---

This session will examine socio-economic factors affecting global supply chains, possible scenarios for the future of global manufacturing and the effect of global supply chain design on net-zero goals.


**1****3:45 Forecasting the future of 4IR: creating value from decentralisation** 

Following China’s inauguration into the World Trade Organisation in 2001, the country has dominated the production of low-cost goods such as textiles, toys, clothes, footwear and furniture. These industries have opened up opportunities for China to expand into manufacturing and production of more advanced items such as electronics.

China has helped to accelerate and sustain our transition to centralised supply chains but with the onset of the pandemic and the subsequent disruption to global supply chains, the world has woken up to the value of decentralisation and fragility of centralisation.

However, to support a global marketplace, the decentralised supply chain model needs to be underpinned by data and 4IR technology. Without data exchange, decentralised supply chains operating in closed loops have the potential to create a barrier to international trade; many organisations lack the funding and technical skills to implement 4IR technology, and driven by low cost labour, are choosing to relocate their production to countries such as Mexico, India, Thailand and Taiwan.

In response to this trend, in December 2021, state planners in China, released a five-year smart manufacturing development plan with the aim of digitizing 70% of the country’s large enterprises. With global supply chains remaining fragmented and fragile, China’s swift transition to 4IR offers a ready-made factory floor of the future and an easy route to stability for companies looking to revive their supply chains post pandemic. By investing heavily in technology such as AI, automation and robotics, China hopes to maintain its place as a manufacturing powerhouse, diversify its exports and ensure prosperity for its people.

Despite these efforts and amid the US-China trade war, rising production costs, instability, and the rising adoption of 4IR technologies, companies have continued to move out of China in droves, prompting policymakers to turn their attentions to revitalising domestic manufacturing sectors. 

In the USA a lack of funding for products as they reach commercialisation and high labour costs, prevents many manufacturers from choosing domestic manufacturing. Despite having a world class R&D sector, many technologies required to meet net zero including batteries and solar panels, are manufactured outside the USA. There is a funding gap between ‘lab and market’ preventing innovative solutions from being commercialised. Bringing manufacturing home and closing the funding gap between the lab and the market, could offer a solution to decoupling economic growth from finite resource by enabling closed loop supply chains and a focus on products that support our planet and advance net zero.

This session will examine socio-economic factors affecting global supply chains, possible scenarios for the future of global manufacturing and the effect of global supply chain design on net zero goals.

**Questions**:

- [[🗂️ المراجع Fleeting Notes/مؤتمر GMIS/1. What financial policy mechanisms are needed to close the manufacturing gap in the USA\|1. What financial policy mechanisms are needed to close the manufacturing gap in the USA]]

- [[🗂️ المراجع Fleeting Notes/مؤتمر GMIS/2. How will financial investment into manufacturing affect progress towards net zero targets\|2. How will financial investment into manufacturing affect progress towards net zero targets]]

·   [[🗂️ المراجع Fleeting Notes/مؤتمر GMIS/3. Do closed loop supply chains stifle innovation - How can technology enable cross-sector collaboration across global value chains\|3. Do closed loop supply chains stifle innovation - How can technology enable cross-sector collaboration across global value chains]]

·  [[4. How can the US increase local production of net zero technologies in the short and medium term\|4. How can the US increase local production of net zero technologies in the short and medium term]]

·  [[🗂️ المراجع Fleeting Notes/مؤتمر GMIS/5. How can 4IR technology support domestic manufacturing\|5. How can 4IR technology support domestic manufacturing]]

·  [[🗂️ المراجع Fleeting Notes/مؤتمر GMIS/6. Are we witnessing the end of centralised supply chains How is technology giving rise to glocalisation\|6. Are we witnessing the end of centralised supply chains How is technology giving rise to glocalisation]]


-------------------------

PROBLEM
How to Forecast the Future of Global Supply Chains based on the Disruptive Nature of the 4IR

The Problem of Decentralization for the Manufacturing Industry
- Benefits of Decentralization
- Disadvantages of Decentralization
	- Socio-Economic Factors effecting

The Problem of Decentralization for the Manufacturing Industry
- If you are decentralized you are more prone to disruption
	- 4IR is extremely disruptive 
		- If you don't have a plan for when it happens you will be wiped out
			- If you don't know what the socio-economic factors are at play you are bound to lose future foresight and market leadership
				- Income is changing due to 
					- Inflation
					- Alternative Currencies
					- Technological Advances (Crypto Currencies)
				- Education
					- Education is becoming more abundant
					- Skilled Staff are everywhere remotely





## Overview

You see the problem with a Decentralized Supply Chain especially that on a global scale is that you are more prone and hypersensitive to subtle changes across the globe to socio-economic factors such as Income, Education, and Occupation and if you factor or magnify that with profound impact of the 4IR, and it is coined as a revolution for no reason and then expedite that with the speed and rate of technological transformation you are left with the questions what do i do next 

If you look back 500 years or 800 years ago you see the same factors leading to declining industries, manufacturers, supply lines. But on a more normalized and slow scale where one can draw conclusions and trends and patterns.

The Factors are 

1) Income
2) Education
3) Occupation

If focus on those 3 you probably have a good chance of that you navigate the ever-changing flow of the Global Market and its continuous ebb.



## Income

Income is based on the Value of the Currency with the 4IR the whole concept of what money is being questioned. For example, the Petro Dollar is being replaced with alternative value systems such as Decentralized Crypto Currency being CBCC or Political Alternatives when countries decide to move away from the USD in their daily transactions. If that happens this will devalue the US dollar, thus shifting some power wielded by the US economy causing supply chain effects globally when Financial Instruments change. Furthermore, the issue with Fiat Currencies is their inflationary aspect, their value inherently decreases over time.

Problem 1: Petro Dollars
Problem 2: Political Shifting Alliances 
Problem 3: Inflationary aspect of Currency

Story 1: Saudi Arabia selling Oil in Chinese Currency
Story 2: Russia demanding Gas be paid in Russian Currency
Story 2: People transacting in Decentralized Crypto Currencies such as Bitcoin
Story 3: The out of hand inflation in Western Economies, especially the US

Income is also based on Raw Materials or resources and Assets of nations, the 4IR is ushering a new era of technologies that are shying away from legacy raw materials or resources. A clear and simple example is that of Electric Cars vs IC Cars, reducing the demand for oil. Or industries moving away from raw materials to synthetic materials, reducing the demand for raw materials due to 4IR advances in manufacturing and material sciences.

Story 1: Electric Cars such as Tesla
Story 2: Composite Material vs Raw Materials in the Aerospace industry




## Education

Education is also a key factor in any economy, the more educated the workforce is, the more robust and adaptable the industry is. Education is primarily based on knowledge and experience.

The more abundant the knowledge is, the more shifting sands the workforce. The more knowledgeable the workforce, the more susceptible the workforce to moving industries or moving geographically. 

The more abundant the knowledge is, the more people and geographies start offering products and services, the more sellers, the more shifting in market conditions and thus disruption to your supply chain.

With the 4IR we have for the first time in history the corpus of Human Knowledge in our pockets, on demand, instantaneously, cross pollination of ideas, theories, disciplines, and skill sets. Add on top of that the new adaptive learning systems and platforms that measure and track the progress of the individual and come out with remedial material based on the specific abilities and capabilities of that individual. 

When this Knowledge is dispersed to other geographies via personal devices and established in those geographies and certified by the use of these AI based learning systems. This brings the problem to the established geographies with decades or centuries of educational leadership globally. 

Say you take a field of study let us say Computer Science at Stanford University today and let us say for the sake of argument imagine the rest of humanity collectively comes up with an online course and agrees that what needs to be in known in that particular field is in that online course and let us say it is equivalent to the 4-year degree but can be taken by anyone and would put them on the knowledge scale on par with that of a Stanford student. 
We then would use AI to model and adapt the questions based on the shortcomings of understanding of that student say in Africa in some remote village and also leverage and develop the strengths of that knowledge and to top on top of that the Market driven factors to pursue cheaper labor regardless of any other factor.

What will happen to Stanford, what will happen to Oxford what will happen to Harvard What will happen to Cambridge, what will happen to current labor force. You see the value in these  historic and legacy outstanding educational institutes is not in the knowledge they offer but rather in the selection process that results in a pool of highly educated students. Each benefiting from the collective presence of the intellectually motivated student body and research opportunities.

The problem also is not so apparent as Education usually moves in a slower and subtle fashion than say that of Income, but it is presenting itself as a slowly moving problem that is gaining speed like a snowball slowly tumbling down a mountain slowly gaining speed and size.

The problem also with Education is it is becoming more fragmented and specialized skill driven 

Problem 1: Standardization and Abundance of Human Knowledge
Problem 2: AI Based Learning vs Legacy Providers

Story 1: Elon Musk's X Prize for Education
Story 2: Cerego - AI Adaptive Learning platform based on the Forgetfulness Curve

Draw comparison that it is only a matter of time that Where you graduated from becomes What you Know the Story of the Xprize where the concept a few years ago was to set a challenge for a private team or company to go to space and back where the winning team became Virgin Galactic fast-forward a few years, and we have the first private space human fearing providers and operators. 


## Occupation

We all know that the 4IR will replace occupations and at the same time introduce new ones. The question is What to do about it with your Workforce ? Well yes there will be 800 Million Jobs as McKinsey says, but why should we focus on the pessimism. Well, we are hard-wired to think like that of all the downside when the upside could be just as good if not even better. It's only human nature to think of the downside of people losing their livelihoods in addition it is even more sensational to highlight the job displacing possibilities and outcomes, and it's even harder to foresee and expect the wonderful and intriguing new roles and responsibilities this new era ushers. When there are enough uncertainties, it is always safer to overstate the potential costs than understate them, warranting unnecessary pessimism.









-------------------------------------

Write about the Effect of 4IR on The Five SocioEconomic Factors 




Links
https://nspek.com/en/blog/read-dr-jordan-petersons-warnings-technology-digital-transformation/

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/09/fourth-industrial-revolution-jobs/ 

[SocioEconomical](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socioeconomic_status?wprov=sfti1)